Soft tissue sarcoma
Request an Appointment
Overview
Tumor in thigh muscle
Soft tissue sarcoma
Enlarge image
Soft tissue sarcoma is a rare type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the body's soft tissues. The soft tissues connect, support and surround other body structures. Soft tissues include muscle, fat, blood vessels, nerves, tendons and linings of the joints.

Soft tissue sarcoma can happen anywhere in the body. It happens most often in the arms, legs and belly.

More than 50 types of soft tissue sarcoma exist. Some types are more likely to affect children. Others affect mostly adults. These cancers can be hard to diagnose because they may be mistaken for many other types of growths.

Soft tissue sarcoma treatment usually involves surgery. Other treatments might include radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Treatment depends on the size, type and location of the cancer and how quickly it grows.

Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Types
Angiosarcoma
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Epithelioid sarcoma
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
Kaposi sarcoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Liposarcoma
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
Myxofibrosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Solitary fibrous tumor
Synovial sarcoma
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
Symptoms
A soft tissue sarcoma may not cause any symptoms at first. As the cancer grows, it may cause:

A noticeable lump or swelling.
Pain, if the growth presses on nerves or muscles.
When to see a doctor
Make an appointment with your health care team if you have any symptoms that worry you.

Diagnosis
Tests and procedures used to diagnose soft tissue sarcoma include imaging tests and procedures to remove a sample of cells for testing.

Imaging tests
Imaging tests create pictures of the inside of the body. They might help show the size and location of the soft tissue sarcoma. Examples include:

X-rays.
CT scans.
MRI scans.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans.
Removing a sample of tissue for testing
A procedure to remove some cells for testing is called a biopsy. A biopsy for soft tissue sarcoma needs to be done in a way that won't cause problems with future surgery. For this reason, it's a good idea to seek care at a medical center that sees many people with this type of cancer. Experienced health care teams will select the best type of biopsy.

Types of biopsy procedures for soft tissue sarcoma include:

Core needle biopsy. This method uses a needle to remove tissue samples from the cancer. Doctors usually try to take samples from several parts of the cancer.
Surgical biopsy. In some cases, your doctor might suggest surgery to get a larger sample of tissue.
The biopsy sample goes to a lab for testing. Doctors who specialize in analyzing blood and body tissue, called pathologists, will test the cells to see if they're cancerous. Other tests in the lab show more details about the cancer cells, such as what type of cells they are.

Care at Mayo Clinic
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your soft tissue sarcoma-related health concerns
Start Here

More Information
Soft tissue sarcoma care at Mayo Clinic
CT scan
MRI
Show more related information
Treatment
Treatment options for soft tissue sarcoma will depend on the size, type and location of the cancer.

Surgery
Surgery is a common treatment for soft tissue sarcoma. During surgery, the surgeon usually removes the cancer and some healthy tissue around it.

Soft tissue sarcoma often affects the arms and legs. In the past, surgery to remove an arm or leg was common. Today, other approaches are used, when possible. For example, radiation and chemotherapy might be used to shrink the cancer. That way the cancer can be removed without needing to remove the entire limb.

Radiation therapy
Device delivering radiation therapy during surgery
Intraoperative radiation therapy
Enlarge image
Radiation therapy uses powerful energy beams to kill cancer cells. The energy can come from X-rays, protons and other sources. During radiation therapy, you lie on a table while a machine moves around you. The machine directs radiation to specific points on your body.

Radiation therapy might be used:

Before surgery. Radiation before surgery can shrink a tumor to make it easier to remove.
During surgery. Radiation during surgery allows more radiation to be delivered directly to the target area. This can spare healthy tissues around the target area.
After surgery. Radiation may be used after surgery to kill any cancer cells that remain.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy uses strong medicines to kill cancer cells. The medicines are often given through a vein, though some are available in pill form. Some types of soft tissue sarcoma respond better to chemotherapy than do others. For instance, chemotherapy is often used to treat rhabdomyosarcoma.

Targeted therapy
Targeted therapy uses medicines that attack specific chemicals in the cancer cells. By blocking these chemicals, targeted treatments can cause cancer cells to die. Your cancer cells might be tested to see if targeted therapy might be helpful for you. This treatment works well for some types of soft tissue sarcoma, such as gastrointestinal stromal tumors, also called GISTs.