Acute lymphocytic leukemia
Request an Appointment
Overview
Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) is a type of cancer of the blood and bone marrow — the spongy tissue inside bones where blood cells are made.

The word "acute" in acute lymphocytic leukemia comes from the fact that the disease progresses rapidly and creates immature blood cells, rather than mature ones. The word "lymphocytic" in acute lymphocytic leukemia refers to the white blood cells called lymphocytes, which ALL affects. Acute lymphocytic leukemia is also known as acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Acute lymphocytic leukemia is the most common type of cancer in children, and treatments result in a good chance for a cure. Acute lymphocytic leukemia can also occur in adults, though the chance of a cure is greatly reduced.

Products & Services
Children’s Book: My Life Beyond Leukemia
Symptoms
Signs and symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia may include:

Bleeding from the gums
Bone pain
Fever
Frequent infections
Frequent or severe nosebleeds
Lumps caused by swollen lymph nodes in and around the neck, armpits, abdomen or groin
Pale skin
Shortness of breath
Weakness, fatigue or a general decrease in energy
When to see a doctor
Make an appointment with your doctor or your child's doctor if you notice any persistent signs and symptoms that concern you.

Many signs and symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia mimic those of the flu. However, flu signs and symptoms eventually improve. If signs and symptoms don't improve as expected, make an appointment with your doctor.

Request an appointment
Causes
Acute lymphocytic leukemia occurs when a bone marrow cell develops changes (mutations) in its genetic material or DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. Normally, the DNA tells the cell to grow at a set rate and to die at a set time. In acute lymphocytic leukemia, the mutations tell the bone marrow cell to continue growing and dividing.

When this happens, blood cell production becomes out of control. The bone marrow produces immature cells that develop into leukemic white blood cells called lymphoblasts. These abnormal cells are unable to function properly, and they can build up and crowd out healthy cells.

It's not clear what causes the DNA mutations that can lead to acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Risk factors
Factors that may increase the risk of acute lymphocytic leukemia include:

Previous cancer treatment. Children and adults who've had certain types of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for other kinds of cancer may have an increased risk of developing acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Exposure to radiation. People exposed to very high levels of radiation, such as survivors of a nuclear reactor accident, have an increased risk of developing acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Genetic disorders. Certain genetic disorders, such as Down syndrome, are associated with an increased risk of acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Diagnosis
A needle suctioning out liquid bone marrow from hipbone
Bone marrow exam
Enlarge image
Lumbar puncture, also called a spinal tap
Lumbar puncture, also known as a spinal tap
Enlarge image
Tests and procedures used to diagnose acute lymphocytic leukemia include:

Blood tests. Blood tests may reveal too many or too few white blood cells, not enough red blood cells, and not enough platelets. A blood test may also show the presence of blast cells — immature cells normally found in the bone marrow.
Bone marrow test. During bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, a needle is used to remove a sample of bone marrow from the hipbone or breastbone. The sample is sent to a lab for testing to look for leukemia cells.

Doctors in the lab will classify blood cells into specific types based on their size, shape, and other genetic or molecular features. They also look for certain changes in the cancer cells and determine whether the leukemia cells began from B lymphocytes or T lymphocytes. This information helps your doctor develop a treatment plan.

Imaging tests. Imaging tests such as an X-ray, a computerized tomography (CT) scan or an ultrasound scan may help determine whether cancer has spread to the brain and spinal cord or other parts of the body.
Spinal fluid test. A lumbar puncture test, also called a spinal tap, may be used to collect a sample of spinal fluid — the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. The sample is tested to see whether cancer cells have spread to the spinal fluid.
Determining your prognosis
Your doctor uses information gathered from these tests and procedures to determine your prognosis and decide on your treatment options. Other types of cancer use numerical stages to indicate how far the cancer has spread, but there are no stages of acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Instead, the seriousness of your condition is determined by:

The type of lymphocytes involved — B cells or T cells
The specific genetic changes present in your leukemia cells
Your age
Results from lab tests, such as the number of white blood cells detected in a blood sample
Care at Mayo Clinic
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your acute lymphocytic leukemia-related health concerns
Start Here

More Information
Acute lymphocytic leukemia care at Mayo Clinic
Bone marrow biopsy
CT scan
Show more related information
Treatment
In general, treatment for acute lymphocytic leukemia falls into separate phases:

Induction therapy. The purpose of the first phase of treatment is to kill most of the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow and to restore normal blood cell production.
Consolidation therapy. Also called post-remission therapy, this phase of treatment is aimed at destroying any remaining leukemia in the body.
Maintenance therapy. The third phase of treatment prevents leukemia cells from regrowing. The treatments used in this stage are usually given at much lower doses over a long period of time, often years.
Preventive treatment to the spinal cord. During each phase of therapy, people with acute lymphocytic leukemia may receive additional treatment to kill leukemia cells located in the central nervous system. In this type of treatment, chemotherapy drugs are often injected directly into the fluid that covers the spinal cord.
Depending on your situation, the phases of treatment for acute lymphocytic leukemia can span two to three years.

Treatments may include:

Chemotherapy. Chemotherapy, which uses drugs to kill cancer cells, is typically used as an induction therapy for children and adults with acute lymphocytic leukemia. Chemotherapy drugs can also be used in the consolidation and maintenance phases.
Targeted therapy. Targeted drug treatments focus on specific abnormalities present within cancer cells. By blocking these abnormalities, targeted drug treatments can cause cancer cells to die. Your leukemia cells will be tested to see if targeted therapy may be helpful for you. Targeted therapy can be used alone or in combination with chemotherapy for induction therapy, consolidation therapy or maintenance therapy.
Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy uses high-powered beams, such as X-rays or protons, to kill cancer cells. If the cancer cells have spread to the central nervous system, your doctor may recommend radiation therapy.
Bone marrow transplant. A bone marrow transplant, also known as a stem cell transplant, may be used as consolidation therapy or for treating relapse if it occurs. This procedure allows someone with leukemia to reestablish healthy bone marrow by replacing leukemic bone marrow with leukemia-free marrow from a healthy person.

A bone marrow transplant begins with high doses of chemotherapy or radiation to destroy any leukemia-producing bone marrow. The marrow is then replaced by bone marrow from a compatible donor (allogeneic transplant).

Engineering immune cells to fight leukemia. A specialized treatment called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy takes your body's germ-fighting T cells, engineers them to fight cancer and infuses them back into your body.

CAR-T cell therapy might be an option for children and young adults. It might be used for consolidation therapy or for treating relapse.

Clinical trials. Clinical trials are experiments to test new cancer treatments and new ways of using existing treatments. While clinical trials give you or your child a chance to try the latest cancer treatment, the benefits and risks of the treatment may be uncertain. Discuss the benefits and risks of clinical trials with your doctor.
Treatment for older adults
Older adults, such as those older than 65, tend to experience more complications from treatments. And older adults generally have a worse prognosis than children who are treated for acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Discuss your options with your doctor. Based on your overall health and your goals and preferences, you may decide to undergo treatment for your leukemia.

Some people may choose to forgo treatment for the cancer, instead focusing on treatments that improve their symptoms and help them make the most of the time they have remaining.

Bone marrow transplant
Request an Appointment
Overview
A bone marrow transplant is a procedure that infuses healthy blood-forming stem cells into your body to replace bone marrow that's not producing enough healthy blood cells. A bone marrow transplant is also called a stem cell transplant.

You might need a bone marrow transplant if your bone marrow stops working and does not produce enough healthy blood cells.

Bone marrow transplants may use cells from your own body (autologous transplant) or from a donor (allogeneic transplant).

Products & Services
A Book: Living Medicine
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Types
Allogeneic stem cell transplant
Autologous stem cell transplant
Why it's done
A bone marrow transplant may be used to:

Safely allow treatment with high doses of chemotherapy or radiation by replacing or rescuing the bone marrow damaged by the treatment
Replace bone marrow that's not working properly with new stem cells
Provide new stem cells, which can help kill cancer cells directly
Bone marrow transplants can benefit people with a variety of both cancerous and noncancerous diseases, including:

Acute leukemia
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Aplastic anemia
Bone marrow failure syndromes
Chronic leukemia
Hemoglobinopathies
Hodgkin's lymphoma
Immune deficiencies
Inborn errors of metabolism
Multiple myeloma
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Neuroblastoma
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Plasma cell disorders
POEMS syndrome
Primary amyloidosis

Diagnosis
A needle suctioning out liquid bone marrow from hipbone
Bone marrow exam
Enlarge image
Lumbar puncture, also called a spinal tap
Lumbar puncture, also known as a spinal tap
Enlarge image
Acute myeloid leukemia diagnosis often begins with an exam that checks for bruising, bleeding in the mouth or gums, infection, and swollen lymph nodes. Other tests include blood and lab tests, bone marrow biopsy, lumbar puncture, and imaging.

Tests and exams to diagnose acute myelogenous leukemia, also called AML, include:

Blood tests
Blood tests for acute myelogenous leukemia might include a test to count the number of blood cells in a sample of blood. This test is called a complete blood count. The results may show too many or too few white blood cells. Often the test finds that there are not enough red blood cells and not enough platelets. Another blood test looks for immature white blood cells called myeloblasts in the blood. These cells typically aren't found in the blood. But they can occur in the blood of people with AML.

Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are procedures that involve collecting cells from the bone marrow. In bone marrow aspiration, a needle is used to draw a sample of the bone marrow fluid. In a bone marrow biopsy, a needle is used to collect a small amount of solid tissue. The samples are typically taken from the hip bone. The samples go to a lab for testing.

In the lab, tests can look for DNA changes in the bone marrow cells. Which DNA changes are present in your bone marrow cells are an important part of diagnosing AML. The results can help your healthcare team create a treatment plan.

Lumbar puncture
Sometimes, a lumbar puncture may be needed if there's concern that the leukemia has spread to the brain and spinal cord. A lumbar puncture also is called a spinal tap. It removes a sample of the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. A small needle is inserted into the lower back to remove a fluid sample. The sample is sent to a lab.

Imaging tests
Imaging tests make pictures of the body. For AML, imaging tests might make pictures of the brain, if there's concern that the leukemia cells have spread there. Imaging might include CT or MRI. If there's concern that the leukemia might have spread to another part of the body, imaging might be done with a positron emission tomography scan, also called a PET scan.

Your AML subtype
If you're diagnosed with AML, you may need further lab tests to determine your AML subtype. These tests include examining your blood and bone marrow for genetic changes and other signs that indicate specific AML subtypes. Currently, there are 15 different subtypes. Your AML subtype helps your healthcare professional determine the best treatment for you.

Care at Mayo Clinic
Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your acute myelogenous leukemia-related health concerns
Start Here

More Information
Acute myelogenous leukemia care at Mayo Clinic
Bone marrow biopsy
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
Treatment
Many types of treatment exist for acute myelogenous leukemia, also called AML. Treatment depends on several factors, including the subtype of the disease, your age, your overall health, your prognosis and your preferences.

Treatment usually has two phases:

Remission induction therapy. This first phase aims to kill the leukemia cells in your blood and bone marrow. But it doesn't usually destroy all the leukemia cells. You will need further treatment to keep the disease from coming back.
Consolidation therapy. This phase also is called post-remission therapy or maintenance therapy. It aims to kill the remaining leukemia cells. Consolidation therapy is crucial to helping lower the risk of relapse.
Treatments include:

Chemotherapy. Chemotherapy treats cancer with strong medicines. Most chemotherapy medicines are given through a vein. Some come in pill form. Chemotherapy is the main type of remission induction therapy. It also may be used for consolidation therapy.

People with AML usually stay in the hospital during chemotherapy treatments because the medicines kill many healthy blood cells while destroying leukemia cells. If the first chemotherapy cycle doesn't cause remission, it can be repeated.

Side effects of chemotherapy depend on the medicines you're given. Common side effects are nausea and hair loss. Serious, long-term complications may include heart disease, lung damage, fertility problems and other cancers.

Targeted therapy. Targeted therapy for cancer is a treatment that uses medicines that attack specific chemicals in the cancer cells. By blocking these chemicals, targeted treatments can cause cancer cells to die. Your leukemia cells will be tested to see if targeted therapy may be helpful for you. Targeted therapy may be used alone or in combination with chemotherapy during induction therapy.

Bone marrow transplant. A bone marrow transplant, also called a bone marrow stem cell transplant, involves putting healthy bone marrow stem cells into the body. These cells replace cells hurt by chemotherapy and other treatments. A bone marrow stem cell transplant may be used for both remission induction and consolidation therapy.

Before a bone marrow transplant, you receive very high doses of chemotherapy or radiation therapy to destroy your leukemia-producing bone marrow. Then you receive infusions of stem cells from a compatible donor. This is called an allogeneic transplant.

There is an increased risk of infection after a transplant.

Clinical trials. Some people with leukemia choose to enroll in clinical trials to try experimental treatments or new combinations of known therapies.