Multiple myeloma
Request an appointment
Overview
Multiple myeloma is a cancer that forms in a type of white blood cell called a plasma cell. Healthy plasma cells help fight infections by making proteins called antibodies. Antibodies find and attack germs.

In multiple myeloma, cancerous plasma cells build up in bone marrow. The bone marrow is the soft matter inside bones where blood cells are made. In the bone marrow, the cancer cells crowd out healthy blood cells. Rather than make helpful antibodies, the cancer cells make proteins that don't work right. This leads to complications of multiple myeloma.

Multiple myeloma treatment isn't always needed right away. If the multiple myeloma is slow growing and isn't causing symptoms, close watching might be the first step. For people with multiple myeloma who need treatment, there are a number of ways to help control the disease.

Request an appointment for multiple myeloma care at Mayo Clinic
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
Early in multiple myeloma, there might be no symptoms. When signs and symptoms happen, they can include:

Bone pain, especially in the spine, chest or hips.
Nausea.
Constipation.
Loss of appetite.
Mental fogginess or confusion.
Tiredness.
Infections.
Weight loss.
Weakness.
Thirst.
Needing to urinate often.
When to see a doctor
Make an appointment with a doctor or other health care professional if you have symptoms that worry you.

Diagnosis
Sometimes a health care professional finds multiple myeloma during a blood test for another condition. Other times your symptoms may lead your health care professional to test for multiple myeloma.

Tests and procedures to diagnose multiple myeloma include:

Blood tests. The M proteins made by myeloma cells can show up in a sample of blood. Blood tests also might find another protein myeloma cells make, called beta-2-microglobulin.

Other blood tests give your health care team clues about your diagnosis. These tests might include tests that look at kidney function, blood cell counts, calcium levels and uric acid levels.

Urine tests. M proteins can show up in urine samples. In urine, the proteins are called Bence Jones proteins.
Bone marrow tests. Bone marrow biopsy and bone marrow aspiration are used to collect bone marrow samples for testing. Bone marrow has a solid and a liquid part. In a bone marrow biopsy, a needle is used to collect a small amount of the solid tissue. In a bone marrow aspiration, a needle is used to draw a sample of the fluid. The samples are typically taken from the hip bone.

The samples go to a lab for testing. In the lab, tests look for myeloma cells. Other special tests give your health care team more information about your myeloma cells. For example, the fluorescence in situ hybridization test looks for changes in the cells' genetic material, called DNA.

Imaging tests. Imaging tests can show bone problems linked with multiple myeloma. Tests may include an X-ray, MRI scan, CT scan, or positron emission tomography scan, also called PET scan.
Stages
The results of your tests help your health care team decide your myeloma's stage. In multiple myeloma, the stages range from 1 to 3. The stage tells your health care team how quickly your myeloma is growing. A stage 1 multiple myeloma is growing slowly. As the stages get higher, the myeloma becomes more aggressive. A stage 3 multiple myeloma is getting worse quickly.

Multiple myeloma can also be given a risk level. This is another way to say how aggressive the disease is.

Your health care team uses the multiple myeloma stage and risk level to understand your prognosis and plan your treatment.